Video Title: EPISODE 21: How to set goals that reflect your true potential and what to avoid
Video URL: https://open.spotify.com/episode/1HjKvpz4paLbo8Gev5OXI2
Transcript generated by SpotScribe - Extract transcripts from any podcast instantly at https://spotscribe.io

========================================

Welcome to the PassionFit Coaching podcast. This podcast is hosted by my husband, Tom Ward, and it is produced and directed by professional athlete Lydia Dant. Tom is our PassionFit Coaching Strategy—no, what are you again? What are you? What are you, actually? Coaching Strategy Creator. So whilst we're trying to figure out the finer details of what Tom's title really
means, sit back and enjoy the podcast. This week: how to set goals that reflect your true potential, and what to avoid. So welcome to episode 21— Episode 21? Episode 21 of the PassionFit Coaching podcast. Welcome. It's been a few days since we recorded one, because it's been a very busy month, hasn't it, for us? A very full month. Very full. Don't like the word busy.
Very full month, doing lots of quite exciting things. November's always like this. Rich month. Rich month. November's always like this, isn't it? Activities. I know. It's one that's quite deceptive. You think you kind of get to winter and it's going to feel a little bit, hmm, there's not a lot going on, and then November. Loads going on. So lots of development for our athletes, lots
of development for athletes, individuals away from the PassionFit community. So some cool things, yeah. So a couple of health warnings. Health warnings, I don't know, sort of logistical warnings about the podcast today. Firstly, there's a lot of stormy weather outside, so we can't promise there won't be. Rain. Pauses or rain noise, yes, because it can be a bit noisy where we
record this. The dog may make some noise because he's having a very traumatic day today. We have bought him a coat. We've trialed lots of coats, and wearing a coat is not something he's particularly keen on. Quite a lot of growling goes on whilst applying the coat. We have got it on him and decided to leave it on him because it was a drama getting it on him, to try and get
him used to it, because he's going to need it on the weekends because we're taking him to a cold race. But as a result, he's in a bit of a strop, and his behaviour is a little unpredictable. At the moment he's not in this room, but he may come back to this room and may decide that he wants to kick up a fuss about something. And Lauren also has some ladies from
Swansea Vale try down, doesn't she? Yes. She has three ladies from Swansea Vale try here, and they are downstairs. In the Ennis Pool. In the Ennis Pool. So they may be making a little bit of noise because they seem like they're having quite a good time down there, don't they? There's a lot of giggling. So they, I think it's Lindsay, Abby, and Rachel that are down there.
Oh, to the Swansea Vale Try Girls. Yeah, Swansea Vale Try Girls. And they're downstairs having a great time, but that might mean a little bit of noise as well. So there's a bit of background noise, apologies for that. We can't do much about it. So it adds to the character of the podcast recordings, doesn't it? Yeah. Okay. So let's get onto the thing that we wanted to
talk about quite quickly so we don't waffle too much. What? So we last week, we talked about potential. What is potential? We tried to explain how to determine what your potential is, because we felt this we feel this is really important. It's something that people talk about quite a lot. I think sometimes we get very confused between our latent ability and our potential.
Those two things are not the same. And often we feel a disproportionate amount of pressure to perform at a level that represents our latent ability, when actually there are a lot of other contributing factors to our potential. And we talked about what those were, examples of them, how to get those things into balance, because if you get this wrong, then you can actually if you get it wrong when you're assessing somebody
else that you're responsible for supporting or developing, or you get it wrong when you're considering your own journey, it can be very disruptive, very toxic, and it's important to get it right. So we talked about that. So if you want to know a bit more about that, go back and listen to that episode. That was episode 20. So what we're going to try to do this week is
we're going to try and then progress that idea and talk a little bit about how to use that idea when you're setting your goals, because of course this time of year is an important period for people setting goals, short, medium, and long-term, process and outcome, and some of the things you might want to consider avoiding doing when you're setting those goals. There'll be a bit of overlap with things that we talked
about before in terms of how a formalised structure of setting goals, the one that we use, but that's okay. No need to not have a reminder of that. We may get on to talk a little bit about vision as well, but we might leave that for next time. We'll see how we go. Now, this is going to be tricky. I'm not going to hide here.
This is going to be difficult to do. As always, we haven't scripted the podcast. We've got a few notes, but not many. So we're doing this from our own level of intuition and understanding of the process. And we did it last night, didn't we, with our community? Yes. So as you know, we have a seminar on a Monday night for our coach athletes, and we did this with them last night, and
it was great. I think it went well. I thought it was brilliant. You thought it was brilliant. You're biased, I think, a little. Yeah, but it also aligns with my way of thinking. It does align with your way of thinking. On that topic, actually, interestingly, Lydia has just today, off the back of yesterday's seminar, shared her insights report from when she
was working in the corporate world. Yeah. Yeah. So. It's insightful. Yeah. Some of you might be familiar with insights, some of you may not, but it's normally a way of sort of categorising individuals and explaining their personality type, their preferences, their fears, their communication styles, their motivators, how they like to be led, managed, etc. And we were just interesting and entertaining in equal measure, wasn't it?
Yes, we were. No. You were trying to be polite. Well, I was trying to be yeah, I was trying to be polite and appropriately PC about my response, but it was entertaining, actually, wasn't it? Yeah, it's actually quite scary how accurate it is. Yeah, it is, yeah. It's spot on. Yeah. And there might be, as we said last week, there might
be a little bit more for us to share with you guys around that and a piece of the journey that you're on at the moment in a few weeks' time, but we'll wait till we know more before we do that. It is also interesting reading through that and when we look at how you engage and interact with other members of the community, yeah, and particularly how Lauren and you
work together as a coaching team, isn't it? Yeah, absolutely. Because Lauren's literally the opposite to you, which is quite fascinating. Some of you might have already worked out already, so if you know Lydia or Lauren, or even if you've just listened to them, if you've got a bit of knowledge about this kind of thing, or you're a leader at work, for example, then
you might have already worked these things out. So it's quite interesting. Anyway. Yes, it's really cool. Really cool. And it's quite a good exercise to do, actually. If you've got the option to do it, ever, independently or at work, take it, because it is quite interesting and it can be scarily accurate. You don't want to pigeonhole yourself, but it is scarily accurate, so.
I've done it a couple of times in my career, so. And it's interesting. And it's really great to have the self-awareness, because it helps you to make sure that you try to utilise your characteristics in a really positive way than in a destructive way. I'm generally quite red as a personality type, and the unsettling thing about being a red personality type is that your bad day behaviours can
be quite destructive. So like Lauren, for example, is yellow-green, and Lauren's bad day, her behaviours aren't really destructive, as it were, and they can be irritating or unproductive, but not destructive. I don't know if she's going to be all right with me saying this, but I've said it now anyway. Too late, isn't it? Have you said it out loud? No, don't. You're more uncomfortable.
Yeah, exactly. But from my perspective, so when you're a red personality type, it's quite interesting because you can get quite anxious. If you care about the impact you have on other people, which I do, you can get quite anxious about having a bad day because you know that it can be quite damaging. So I certainly don't if you have any discomfort with being a red personality type,
it kind of is who I am, but I have to be okay with that. But yeah, anyway, it's just an interesting exercise to go through. I don't want to digress too much. So let's crack on with what we wanted to talk about, which is this piece about goal setting. And actually, what I've just been talking about also connects to this a little bit.
Probably won't get into that today, but it does connect with it a little bit. Let's try and talk about goal setting and how your potential is something you need to consider when you're setting goals, and how you can what other things you need to think about when you're considering goals. And the reason that we talked about this last night is because this is something for you, Lydia.
You feel that it's something people could really do better at, I think, bluntly. Benefit from. Yeah, benefit from, but. To bring clarity to their journey probably. Yeah, yeah. And they could benefit from quite a lot. And certainly as an athlete yourself and a coach, it's something you've always been pretty good at doing, and it's certainly been a big contributor to the progression you've been
able to make. Yeah. Yeah. So obviously we know that you've got a solid amount of latent ability as an endurance athlete, but the progression you've been able to make on that part of your journey and on other parts of your journey has also been strongly impacted by your ability to go through the process that we're going to try and talk about today. Yes, 100%. Okay. So I guess the first thing is
let's introduce you to the goal setting process that we use, and we'll share this image on our social media, I guess. Yeah, we can. Yeah. We've shared it many times before, but we'll share this on our social media. And I try not to spend too much time on this because we've talked about this in great detail on previous episodes. So I wish I knew which number it
was, but never mind. So we use a model, an acronym, that is the word IPSATIV. Okay, so you'll all be familiar with SMART goals. Most of you will have come across SMART goals or SMARTer goals at some time in your life. It's been around for a long, long time. It's commonly used in the sporting environment and education and the corporate world.
It's used in the corporate world a lot. SMART stands for Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. And sometimes you have E&R, so SMARTer, and that's Exciting and Recordable at the end. I've never liked SMART very much. I've explained why in the past. I've often said it shouldn't even be SMART goals, it should be SMAR. That's a bit of shit, isn't it? You can't sell SMAR.
Not really. Not really. Because if a goal's specific, it must be time-bound. It can't be specific if it's not time-bound, but you had to stick that T on the end to make it work. And yeah, I don't know, I've always been a bit dismissive about SMART goals. I have used them because it is a good process, but it often lacked key things. There was always a danger with SMART goals
that you could easily get drawn into setting goals that weren't individualised enough to you. They weren't about your journey. They were societally influenced, or and I got caught in that trap a lot, particularly when I went to university, for example. The decision I made there to do the subject that I did was based around societally influenced goals and my latent ability, not so much my potential.
And also, goals can be quite destructive. They can be quite toxic if they're set in an inappropriate way. So you can set SMART goals that are very toxic and destructive to other people, maybe even yourself. Sometimes our desire for a specific outcome in life can be quite destructive. Take the Olympic Games. Everyone, not every, but a very large percentage of athletes going to the Olympic Games are there to try and get
a medal. And only three people in individual events get a medal. Only three teams get a medal in non-events. And the reality is that the fact that the top three get a medal is arbitrary anyway. Someone just went, "Oh, three that'll do. We'll go gold, two will go bronze. We can't think of another one for fourth." What would we give them?
I don't know. Wood. Gold, silver, bronze, wood. But we then get really disappointed with fourth, for example, because we don't get a medal. And of course, in reality, does it really mean much difference, third, fourth, even first, potentially? So we can set that goal, and then when we don't achieve it, or we don't feel we're on trajectory to achieve it, then that goal that maybe once felt
motivating and exciting suddenly becomes quite toxic. So that was always the thing about SMART goals for me, is that they presented quite a lot of risk and there were a lot of pitfalls with them. So I wanted to come up with something new. It wasn't something I came up with quickly. There's a story behind it, but we won't bore you with that today. We were very fortunate that the phrase IPSATIV, the
word IPSATIV, which is a word that's used to describe progression and performance relative to your start point and your potential, not relative to arbitrary measures or others, is a word that's commonly used in the education world. So for example, we often measure children based on SATS, when actually that's not always the fairest way to measure children. An IPSATIV assessment is a more appropriate way, although of course it's tricky to do
because it's more subjective, but it's a more appropriate way of measuring progression and performance. And we use this a lot within our community when we are discussing with our athletes their progression and their performance level. We do that as best we can collaboratively with them using an IPSATIV format. But from our perspective, we were very lucky that the word IPSATIV also provided the perfect acronym for our goal setting model.
And it genuinely is luck. I'm not bullshitting you there. People often don't believe me, but it is. And let me just run you through what the letters stand for. So I is for individualised, or IPSATIV, I guess, in itself, in the sense that your goal should be individualised to you. It should be based on your start point and your potential.
We've already talked about what potential is last week. So it must be based on your start point and your potential. It shouldn't be based on those arbitrary measures or necessarily how you perform relative to other people or societally based influences. So when we pick up athletes and we ask athletes what their goals are before we consider working with them, invariably people give us performance-based goals that are aspirational because
they often feel like impressing us with those goals is something that is important to us, which a passion for it absolutely isn't. So the goals that we're impressed by, the ones that have an element of balance and individualisation to them. So individualising your goal is very, very important. For example, we often use the or we often use the example of a 90-minute half marathon as being a goal.
Well, that in itself is entirely arbitrary. What we're saying is that 1.524ths of a day, for some reason, for 13.1 miles, is something that matters. When you think about it like that, it just defies logic. And yet we'll often define success and failure by that measure. Crazy, right? Don't get me wrong. I have those kinds of goals myself, but they're
well thought out, and there's a bit more to them than just plucking them out of my arse, which is kind of what you're doing if you just do do that. Yeah. So they must be individualised. They need to be precise. So even though they're individualised, they need to be precise. So they can't be waffly and vague like, "I want to be faster.
I want to complete." Be better. "I want to be better. I want to finish a 70.3." That's not precise. Which one? When? Etc., etc. Yeah? Better. Well, you need to be able to define better. Be specific about it. How does that look? Yeah? So they need to be precise. Okay? So individualised and precise. And I get it. People go, "Oh, this is just
a different version of SMART." Well, yeah, it loads large. You can't reinvent the wheel, but you can make it better. Okay? And that's what we've endeavoured to do here. They need to be suitable. So the goals need to be suitable. So does the goal actually suitable for your life journey? Actually, does it fit? So for example, if you had a goal let's
say as a triathlete, you're a triathlete and you have a goal that you want to bench press 120 kilos for three times eight reps. It's likely that that goal isn't very suitable for your wider journey. So it's got to be suitable, right? If my body the body composition goals that I try to work towards, if I wanted to be a sumo wrestler, they wouldn't
be very suitable for my goal, my wider goal. So it's important as well. They need to be suitable. A stands for attainable or aspirational. And we're damn lucky that they both start with A. And goals can be either, and they can be a bit of both at the same time as well. Oh, here comes the dog, Lyds.
So let's just you have to let him in, otherwise he'll be very unhappy. I'm just sending Lyds to let him in. Everyone's going to be waiting to see if he does something exciting now, but he won't. He just wants to here we go. He's looking very unhappy still, isn't he? One of his goals was definitely not to wear a coat, that's for sure. So the goal needs to be attainable or
aspirational. It can be either. It depends on your preference. There's nothing wrong with having goals that you know you can achieve. Some people find that more motivating than setting goals that are maybe ones they're less sure about. So you choose. And your coach should be able to support you with both as long as the choice is one that motivates you.
The goal should be trackable. You should be able to measure your progress towards it or your achievement of it. That goes without saying. And you should have some influence over your goal. Again, it's one of the things about SMART goals, is that sometimes you can choose goals you don't have enough influence over. So you should have influence over, not control, influence. So for example, as a professional
athlete, Lyds might have some outcome goals in a race, a goal that is connected to where she finishes relative to the pairs that she's racing against. But she can't control that goal, but she can have influence over it. You might have goals around races that you want to do, and you need to be able to have influence over your likelihood of doing those.
So you need to have the financial resource to be able to do it. You need to be able to engage your stakeholders to be able to support you on that journey. If you're a 12-year-old and you want a Ferrari, it might tick all the other boxes, but you probably don't have a lot of influence over your ability to do that, do you? So you need to think about the fact the
goal needs to be influenceable. I know that might not be a word, but it is now. Okay. We went to Chelham Ladies College, didn't we, for a workshop, and we asked them to determine whether or not how we should spell this, and they decided. So when we put this out in our content, I'm sure they're a lot more educated than we are. So we went with their decision.
It needs to be value-adding. This is a really important one. It needs to be value-adding, not just to you, but to the people that it impacts on. There are a lot of people that in history have had goals that we've often found very inspirational. A lot of our heroes have these goals, but when we actually get underneath the story, these people and their journeys can be quite destructive
and quite toxic. And so it needs to be value-adding. And sometimes sport itself in its current format is very non-value-adding. Actually, it's more toxic than we realise. That's not going to change in my lifetime, but that is the reality, that actually elite sport in particular does an awful lot of damage to people. And by the time they're aware of that, it's too late.
Often they don't realise until they've walked away. And that's similar for the corporate world. Sometimes we have these exciting aspirations about what we're going to achieve in the corporate world, particularly financial aspirations. And then actually when we reflect back, we realise that we made a terrible mistake. Not everybody. Not everyone. I'm sure Jordan Belfort didn't feel like that, even after going to prison. He went to prison, didn't he, in the end?
But I could be wrong, but I'm sure he was quite happy with the choice he made. I've got a friend who's a bit like that. And then finally, the goal needs to be exciting. It needs to be something that motivates you. When I say exciting, I don't mean like you're peeing in your pants because you're at poolside and you can't just wait to get on with your 3100s.
It needs to be exciting because you feel motivated by it. Even if actually you're like, "Oh, gosh, this makes me nervous," or, "I didn't particularly want to get up this morning," there's got to be enough there that overrides that feeling. Not that you're doing that of obligation or obsession, but you're doing it because, "Yeah, I don't want to get up at half past 5, quarter past 5, whatever
it is in the morning." Tomorrow our guys start at half 5 in the morning. I'm sure none of them jump out of bed at quarter to 5. A couple of them do, actually. Let's be honest. But they probably don't, but they're excited by the benefit that the decision that they're going to make has on their journey. So that's IPSATIV goal setting. Okay? And like I said, we'll put that up,
and you can obviously rewind this back if you want to listen to that again. So that is something you need to consider. So when you're setting goals, how does potential that we talked about last time and an effective goal setting model, it doesn't matter if you don't use IPSATIV, if you want to use SMART, that's fine. It's not about the model. It's about the goal setting being an effective process, which
people honestly aren't good at. I sat with the six HR directors of one of the biggest blue-chip companies in the UK four years ago, and all ladies. And I say that because in my experience, ladies tend to be a bit better at this than men. Men tend to have quite eccentric goals, and most of their goals tend to be linked to their a lot of their goals are often linked
to the domination of others. Ladies tend to be a bit better than that with their goal setting. But I sat with six HR directors from one of the biggest blue-chip companies in the country at one point, and in a three-hour afternoon session, off the back of a whole day workshop, they really struggled to set effective goals using the SMART model. And so it is something you have to practice at.
You have to be very deliberate at it. You have to practice doing it. Okay? So don't assume that it's easy to do. When you use a model like SMART or IPSATIV to set goals, don't start with the model. That's the mistake people often make. So I'll start with the goal and then go back to the model and cross-reference it and see whether or not it ticks those
boxes. If it doesn't, what do you need to do with the goal to get it to do that? Okay? So that's really important. For example, if it's not motivating or if you're not going to be motivated and committed enough, go back and review the goal. If you have a goal and you find you're not motivated over time, go back and review it. Okay? So that's really, really important, the way you use
the model. But how does this model link up with potential? So we talked about potential last time. We talked about how it's a combination of your latent ability or your inherent ability, but latent ability is maybe a better way of describing it. What you can do, so your logistics, your reality, and what you will do, your level of motivation. Those are the three things that combine to define
your potential, not just latent ability. So you can have all the ability in the world, but if your circumstances are such that you can't do what needs to be done to unlock it, then your potential can't be just your latent ability. If you're not motivated to do what needs to be done to unlock it, then that will affect your potential. And you shouldn't feel that that's a crime.
A lot of people are made to feel that that's the phrase "a waste of potential" really irritates me because I think that's not true. It even saying "a waste of latent ability" isn't appropriate because what if that person doesn't like doing what it is that they're good at? They don't have an obligation to do that. I was when I was at school,
and I was quite good at maths. And I did A-levels and degree in maths, and I didn't do that well. And the reason was I didn't really like maths very much. There's parts of it I like, but I didn't really like it very much. So I wasn't very motivated. I had the time to do it. I had the ability to do it, but I just couldn't be asked, really, to
be honest with you. And so I'd probably been better off doing art. I wasn't very good at art, to be honest with you, but I'd have probably done better because I was in fact, I did do quite well at art school. Not that I was any good, but I was very motivated. I just really enjoyed it. So I tried really hard, and I thought innovatively about
how I could get better and go about it. So I've lost myself a little bit there, but I think this is so potential, yeah. So make sure you're clear. And again, you go back and listen to our podcast from last time to be clear on what that looks like because your potential is very important when it comes to setting goals. Because the danger is if you don't
understand your potential when you're setting goals, then you can make mistakes. So where are those mistakes likely to fall in the goal setting process, and how can they and what sort of impact can they have? And this is, like you said, Lyds, this is what we talked about yesterday with our guys, didn't we? Because a lot of them are going through that process of
setting goals for. For 2024. For 2024. Okay. Excuse me. I just got to take my hat off. Your head hot. It is a bit. My head's a bit hot. My top lips are I've gone November this year. I don't always do it. I haven't really done it very well, have I, in the past? No. No, no, no. No.
It's been a bit of a shocker, hasn't it, to be honest with you? But I've done it quite well. See improvement this year? I think I would say it's been a bit more of a compliment than that. I thought I'd done it quite well, actually. We haven't quite finished yet. Well, no, we haven't finished yet. But it's quite good already.
Relative to start point. Yes. IPSATIV-ly, it's good, isn't it? It's actually not a bad job, is it? So I'm thinking of keeping it. I'd like to think it makes me more macho, look more macho, because I'm not renowned for my macho persona, am I? But I think it does the opposite, probably. Probably. So we'll see. But I quite like it. Caroline Lyds, you won't like it.
2024? I don't know if Caroline listens to this, but she won't like it. Oh, Emma Billum. Emma Billum. You don't like mustaches, do you? So you won't like this either. So neither does my wife or my mother. Okay. So 2024 goal setting. So why is it important that you get your assessment of your potential right when you're setting goals? And where are those potential hurdles if
you get this wrong? So attainable and aspirational is the obvious place to start. Your potential's really important when you're considering that. Is the goal attainable? Is it aspirational? If you've got your assessment of your potential wrong, then that's not going to be great. So if your logistics are such, let's say, for example, you want to do an Ironman. And actually, I don't know if it's fair to touch
on this because I might get this wrong because being a man, I might not understand this well enough. But let's take the example of I don't want to digress too much, but I think it's important. Ironman have just started an initiative that's focused on helping find ways to get more women to the World Championships. Yes, they have. They have. And I'm a massive advocate of that.
I think it's a brilliant initiative. And I don't care. I mean, if it's a money-making exercise, but it will be to some extent, I couldn't really give a shit, to be honest with you, because I still think it's a good thing. All right? I wouldn't say I'm a capitalist, but I'm a realist, and I understand that that's the world we live in.
It's a business, but also providing opportunity as well. Yeah. It's providing a fantastic opportunity. And what they've done is they've made it easier is probably not the right word, but they've provided more pathways for ladies to qualify for the World Championships than there are for men. Yeah. Have I got that right? Yeah. Based on the circumstances that women are commonly in, in comparison to men.
Yeah. So in the societal structure we currently exist in, there are barriers that women have to be able to follow the process that will help them to qualify in the normal way, in the old way. Do two full distances. Yeah. The men don't face, percentage-wise. Okay. So yeah, for example, two full distances in one year, which is fundamentally what you've got to do in a calendar year to
be able to qualify, then to qualify and do it, that's quite a big ask for quite a lot of ladies. I coach a lot. We coach at least half our client basis ladies, and I coach all but one lady. And I know the challenges that they face relative to the men that I've coached in the past. So when we're talking about their goals and we're talking about
doing full-distance racing, for example, certainly a couple of the ladies I coach, all of a sudden, the possibility of being able to go to Nice or Kona World Championships has increased. The possibility of going has improved because their qualification pathway is one that may be more realistic for them to be able to achieve. Not because they're not capable enough athletes physiologically, but because their life journey is such,
the logistics for them would just be too difficult. They couldn't make the training process work and maintain balance in their current life circumstances. And so for me, it's wonderful to see that. So in the past, even though they might have had the ability to go to be able to race at a level that could take them to the World Champs, they might have had the motivation to, they didn't have the reality
that would allow them to do that. So setting that as a goal wasn't one that was really either attainable or aspirational. It was delusional. Yeah. And sometimes they'd still set it. I had one athlete do this, and the destructive because she was quite this was a long time ago. She was probably a little bit self-focused, and it had quite a lot of big,
serious damaging effect on her family life because she was so fixated on this that she, despite me trying to discourage her from being it had quite a negative impact on her family life, even though she actually did have a very supportive partner, it still did. It got to the point where she was neglecting her family a bit more than I think was fair. So I think so I think for me, I
think it's a wonderful initiative because whilst we readdress the balance of roles and responsibilities in the world, it allows women that opportunity that maybe they wouldn't have perhaps had. And maybe, again, probably not in my lifetime, we'll see better balance between the pathways that men and women follow on their life journeys. But at the moment, we don't see that. And whilst we're going through that process, this is great to see.
That's brilliant. Yeah. And if I'm honest, I think I'm quite progressive in my thinking, but I never really thought about that. I mean, I'm pretty embarrassed, if I'm honest. I was shamed that I'd never thought about that as being a good option for Ironman. It's quite a theme, hasn't it, in the workshops that we run with groups of women around their goal setting and the common piece around the home-life balance and
how to make that work with the training as well. So yeah, I mean, it's wicked. It just reminds me, though, how little I really understand. Even though I really try to understand, I just didn't really properly. Yeah. Because I never and it frustrates me that I didn't. Yeah. I'm not saying it's not an excuse, but it's also not relatable for you,
is it? Well, no, but. But it's being aware. The point is developing better understanding because we're never going to we're never going to improve things if we don't. Have that awareness and the foresight. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So we've got to we've got to we've got to, first of all, make sure that we listen to women when they're talking about these things, especially men. And as men, obviously, we've got to be
really, really aware that we probably never will understand, and we may have to accept that we don't understand, and we just accept that what we've been asked to do is a good step forwards. Yeah. Or we just hand the responsibility and ownership over to ladies to make the decisions. Because often in these situations, too many of the decision-makers are men, aren't they? Yeah. The PTO. God, bloody hell.
Let's not get started on the PTO, shall we? So going back to this link between your goal-setting process and these models, it's important that you are aware of your potential when you're thinking about the attainable and aspirational part of that process. Also, the suitable part comes into that a little bit as well. Is the goal suitable for the overall life journey that you're taking?
So if, for example, you are very committed to the development of your children, for example, is setting the goal of doing an Ironman going to be suitable for the priority you have in your life? It may not. It may conflict. Yeah. And that's slightly different from the attainable piece. That suitability, does it conflict with the other areas of your life? Either will it cause damage?
So you need to think about the can part of the potential model when you're considering suitability. Individualized is very important because if you don't feel motivated to do something, or again, if you don't feel like you've got the logistic opportunity to do something, then the goal may not be individualized enough for you. You might be thinking it's, "Oh, yeah. I see my mate do that, and that
looks wicked. I'd love to do that." But you may not have considered those other things as well. So that's quite important. The influenceable piece is important when you come when it's impacted quite a lot by the potential model. So that's important as well. The exciting piece, obviously, links directly to what you were prepared to do and what you will do. So it's very important that you link
these things up when you're considering your goals going into 2024, and the two models go together. Now, what we're not going to talk about today, which we talked about in our seminar, is how you link our intuition scale into this. I think that's probably a bit too much for today. We'll try and work a way of bringing that in because that's a very important
model. But you particularly like this model, Lyds, don't you? You think it is very important when it comes to that goal-setting process, don't you? Oh, yeah. I think it directly relates back to help you kind of reverse engineer back through that process as well. Yes. To really, actually, truly understand your goals and be able to sense-check it in another way, but also to constantly use it and
be able to adjust your goals. So yeah. I think they're kind of inextricably linked. Yeah. So what Lyds is saying, I guess, is that our intuition scale is something we use a lot with our athletes, where we take them from the intuition scale is a process that takes you from data through to the term we use is courage and trust. You'll have heard that. You might have seen that phrase written on
our kit. We replace the phrase belief with the words courage and trust because we don't believe in belief. We think that that sort of self-belief is something that can be a bit of an illusion and that actually it's courage and trust. It's trust in a process, trust in yourself, and the courage to step forwards and have a go at something anyway. Because can you ever really truly believe?
Are you ever going to be free of self-doubt? It's unlikely. That's kind of hardwired into a lot of us. And again, for ladies, probably a bit more than men because of the way men have treated ladies over the last few hundred years or forever, basically, actually. But just below that courage and trust level, which is at the very top, is strategy. So the intuition scale basically takes you
from data, which is everything. Data is everything that you experience, all of the stuff that's available to you. And then the next level is information. But it takes you all the way from those through a fair of steps up to strategy. And of course, the strategy that you employ to achieve your goals is very dependent on your ability to work through the other steps of that process.
So you can't set a strategy unless you fully understand what that goal is about and what it's going to entail. So if you're going to do an Ironman or a 70.3, for example this is why we like triathlon because triathlon's not just a great metaphor, but a great vehicle for developing these things. But it isn't just about, let's say, like that. It might be getting that promotion,
getting that job. It might even be about starting a family or buying a house. If you're going to take a step and set that goal, you need an understanding of all of the steps that work towards creating a strategy to achieve that goal. And what you can do is you can reverse engineer from the goal all the way back to developing the strategy. And that strategy is very important because the strategy
itself then might determine whether the goal fits within your potential spectrum. Because if you can't find a strategy that works or that you can feel motivated to stick to, then again, you've got to question whether that goal is the right one for you. Or you might at one point feel that that's appropriate and then find that actually the strategy is harder to execute than you expected because of either
motivation or logistics, or you overestimated your ability, your latent ability. And so you need to change it. It's a fluid model. It moves all of the time. And in fact, in reality, you use this in races, but you use it very quickly, don't you, in the moment. Yeah. In fact, all good sports people do. All good professionals do.
All good parents do. Yeah. So it's one of those things that's quite useful, but we probably won't talk too much about that today. Okay. So that's the piece. That's how you connect the two things up. Now, the thing that we are going to talk about is maybe some of the things I said at the beginning. We talk a little bit about maybe some of
the things that you might need to consider avoiding when you're setting goals. We've touched on that a little already, haven't we? So we've talked about avoiding goals that aren't your own, trying not to get drawn into those societally influenced goals. We've talked about making sure, again, the goals are attainable or at least aspirational. They're not delusional, that you have an awareness of your potential.
Obviously, that's something else that we need to be careful of. Setting goals around arbitrary measures. I know it's difficult to do. I have a goal that's time-based at the moment. It's a big goal for me. And I understand the irony and contradiction and perhaps hypocrisy in having that goal. But there's a lot more to it than that. There's a lot more to the
reason I've got the goal. It's not as simple as I've got this goal because I've just pulled it out of my backside. There's a bit more to it than that. I remember for a while I had the goal of going sub-4 at a 70.3 because I went 404 one year, and then I'd worked out that I could have gone sub-4. I might think about it as a crazy goal to have.
It didn't really make a lot of sense. But then it did because when I looked at it, I actually only managed to work out that I could go 401 in that race. I wasn't quite sure where the other minute was going to come from in terms of controllable factors. But I also felt that if I was consistent for the year between the two races, that minute might come naturally as part of
the process that I trusted. And it did. It did for me, combined with some favorable conditions as well and a nice race dynamic. All those things helped. But I'm not going to say I didn't have that goal. I did. But of course, what was important is why I had it. I didn't just have it. And this is probably something we're going to come onto.
So one of the things that I always think is really important to avoid is validation goals. Yeah? You like that? You agree with that? Well, yeah. And it's something I have to really make sure I'm also straying away from because it is, isn't it? I have a tendency to fixate on certain sessions or patterns that I think if I do X, Y, and Z would result in
that then subsequently happening in a race. And not looking for that and not forcing a session just for the validation. So yeah, that's been quite an interesting one to try and work on. You're definitely better at that now, aren't you, than you were. Better now, yes. But I definitely fell into a trap of needing to do feeling that that's probably it, needing to do a certain session.
Yeah. Which session in particular was one that used to crop up quite a lot? 3 by 20 minutes of sweet spot. Yeah. 3 by 20 minutes of sweet spot. So we quite often have a lot of debates about the validity or the importance of that session, wouldn't we? Yeah. We do. That you'd want to do it every week if you could. And if it didn't go at one point, not now, but
a few years ago, if you didn't deliver the output that you were expecting, what often happened? Well, I'd probably have a bit of a meltdown about it. After, during? Both. Both? Yeah. And there was a box of tissues by my bike. There was. Ready just in case. There was, which was a bit of banter, but often needed, annoyingly. Well, yeah. Supposed to be funny, but ended up being necessary.
And it wasn't crying with laughter. No. No. So yeah. So it is quite an interesting one to how you can use sessions in a constructive way, but not become fixated on an outcome of a certain one, but look at them in terms of the bigger picture as well. Yeah. So validation goals crop up both in those bigger goals, like your sort of
endgame goals, like races, for example, but also in training. So sometimes we choose a race goal like an Ironman because we feel that finishing an Ironman will give us some validation. It'll validate who we are, right, and make us feel more worthy. If we want to use terminology I've been told not to use by people, it will fill that existential void. So we choose these goals because
we feel that subconsciously we have that bit of a feeling of low self-worth or emptiness, and we think that that will help us. Or like in your case, Lyds, as you said, we fixate on certain parts of a process that we feel validate our progression towards another goal. Yeah. And that can be quite toxic. In fact, it can be very toxic. But it's part of how we set goals
in life, isn't it, a lot of the time? We do this with work. People decide, right, well, if I get a promotion, that will validate my ability. It'll validate my importance or my competence at work by getting promoted, often into a role we don't even really want. And I saw this quite a lot, and it's something I tried to discourage in my teams when I worked in the bank.
Maybe I had a bit of an ulterior motive sometimes if they were good at their current job. I don't know. Should I admit that? Well, I have now. It's too late, isn't it? But also, I did see it quite a lot. People would aim for that promotion. They were really good at the job they did. Really loved it. Really good at it.
And then they'd aim for a promotion into, maybe, say, from a sales role into a leadership role and then find it really difficult to do because they felt like the promotion was some sort of validation of that. And of course, the culture we existed in would encourage it. I remember turning down a promotion once, and I got really pressured into it. It was a reasonable amount more money, but it was a
little bit more travelling. And I turned it down because I loved the team that I was working in, and I loved the location that I was working in in terms of my life balance. And I turned it down. And the regional director within the company I worked for actually said to me so this was the team I was going to go to.
So he was trying to poach me from my current region into his region to do a job. And he actually said to me at because he got me in for, I guess, an informal interview because they asked me, "What do you think the managing director of retail banking is going to say when I tell him you turned down this opportunity?" Oh, God. And that did unsettle me, to be honest with you,
because these were some bloody important people. And I went back to my regional director and told him what was said. And fair play to him. He said a couple of things to me. He said, "First of all, right, leave it with me. I'll deal with it. Let me pick this up. Don't worry about it anymore. Don't lose sleep over it.
I've got your back." And secondly, he said to me, "Look, I can't promise you anything specific, but if you stick with me, I will do everything I can to reward you for that decision." And he did. Six months later, he did. He found a very creative way of rewarding me, not in a legal way. He was saying this bit tortured. I didn't know what he said.
He found a really creative way of finding a way to reward me for my loyalty and self-awareness and all those things. And it really resonated with me. And that guy probably doesn't even listen to my podcast. Mehmet Colliari. That was you, by the way. All right. So I just thought I'd let you know. I connected to Mehmet on LinkedIn, and
I doubt he listens to this. Let's be tagging him in the LinkedIn post. But yeah, and it really, really stuck with me. I mean, this is probably 20 years ago, and I remember. And it was really important to me, and it taught me a really important lesson about how to lead people and how to support people, one I still use now. So yeah, thanks, Mehmet. That was great.
It really meant a lot to me. And I think so going back to what I was saying previously was it's really important that you're careful about goals that you maybe got fixated on or drawn towards because they provide you an element of validation. So that's something that you've got to be really careful about. But we do do it all the time because we feel like the process of
being a higher-functioning version of ourselves isn't enough because the world that we live in makes us feel like it's not enough. And it is enough. It is. And in Passion Fit, we have a monthly accomplishment award because and it rarely goes to someone because of a race. It rarely does because in fact, last month, we had loads of people absolutely excel at Ocean Lava in different parts of
the race or the race overall. And yet our award went to an athlete that hadn't raced at all, didn't even come to Ocean Lava because that's not what being a high-functioning and accomplished person is about. I'm not saying those people at Ocean Lava didn't do really well. They did. But there's a lot more to it. And sometimes the journey itself, that better version of ourselves, that best version of ourselves
on any given day should be enough for us. And you know when you've got that nailed because racing becomes a distraction from that process. Yeah? Setting race goals because you need motivation to follow a process. That's dangerous, isn't it? Yeah. Really risky. Yeah. Really risky, that one. I mean, how many of you fallen into that trap?
I went through a race to motivate me to train. Honestly. I've done it. You have done it. Yeah. You have done it. And it's just a vicious circle. It is a vicious circle. And all that will happen is you'll just hate your training. Yeah. Well, and then never do the race either. Yeah.
Or never do the race. Yeah. But you'll just hate the training. So that's something you really got to avoid. You've got to think about whether or not the race goal and the process or whatever it be, the promotion, the race, having a family, starting a family, buying a house, whatever it might be, that goal that you're setting yourself is the strategy you're going to have to employ to get
there going to be motivating on its own. Because if it's not motivating on its own, I tell you what, that goal is destined to become toxic for you and demotivating and a really horrible part of your life. Endgame goals. Oh, God, those ones. If I do this, my life will be better. That's another one. Is that the same as a validation goal?
I don't know. I don't know. Because it puts you in a provisional state, doesn't it? Yeah. These endgame goals where once I achieve that, my life will be better. There's a couple of things, like you just said, Lyds. One thing it can do is put you in a provisional state where you're kind of waiting for that day to come because on that day or after that day,
you'll be happier about yourself, or you'll feel more fulfilled. So the journey, again, itself isn't fulfilling. So all the way up to that point, the only thing that's motivating you is this perception and probably false belief that once you achieve that, then you'll be fulfilled. But it often is also followed when you get to that point, that endgame, it's often followed by a massive anti-climax.
Yeah. Post-race blues. Because what happens is you realise that it didn't change. Nothing changed because of that. And now you've got nothing to motivate you. Whereas I never feel post-race blues. Neither do you. Nope. And it's rare for our athletes to feel that too, isn't it? Because the race is just part of a process that they follow day in, day
out. Yeah. We all struggle a little bit with rest and recovery, I think, because we enjoy training. We genuinely do, particularly mountain biking and gravel biking and stuff. But again, none of our athletes feel demotivated by rest and recovery. They're not anxious about, "God, getting back to training, getting back to training," because they see it as part of that journey to becoming a higher-functioning version of themselves, and
they're motivated to do it, aren't they? Yeah. So again, that endgame kind of goal is one that is risky, isn't it? So these are the kinds of goals that are really important to avoid. And I think also the other one, and I don't know how to position this or categorise this, but the other one is racing for charity. That's risky. Now, I'm not going to say you shouldn't race for charity.
Don't take me out of context, please. Although I have my opinions on charities. People who work for charities are going to hate me now, but whatever. I certainly am not a big Children in Need fan, that's for sure. Or you've got to look at the cost of one Euro Fighter and compare it to the money raised at Children in Need, and it gives you some perspective, doesn't
it? Yeah. But let's not. Let's not get on the soapbox. I'll get in trouble from Lauren. But charity-based goals are risky. It's great. Raise money for charity. It's fantastic. These charities help people by raising money for them. That's superb. But the problem is if you decide that that's your motivator, that can also be really risky as well because, again, it can become really pressurising
and toxic for you if you're not raising the money in the way that you should. So there's nothing wrong with doing a race for charity, but you probably need to be motivated both by the race and the process before you consider doing it for charity, not the other way around. Because in my experience, when athletes have entered a charity-based or set a charity-based goal, they've found it hard to enjoy the process.
And in the end. Process. They just wanted to get to the end of the race, get to the race, get it done so they don't have that pressure anymore. And that's not really the way we want to be going about that, is it? No. So those are some of the things potentially to consider avoiding. Now, there might be other things. I don't know if I've forgotten anything.
Anything you can think of, Lyds, on top of that? No. I think that's quite concise in that respect. I think the biggest thing for me is you need to firstly have that intrinsic motivation. So when you're starting setting these goals, like we've kind of said before, and what Simon Sinek says is going back to really understanding that why.
Because if that's strong enough, then everything else should naturally start to fall into place. But understanding that, not just superficially thinking it, but really, really actually, what's my key motivator and that deeper reason for wanting to do this in the first place. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. So understanding your why. I mean, it's a very simplistic way of saying it, isn't it? But it's true. Whenever you set a goal, "Why am I
doing this? And is my why powerful enough and appropriate? And does it meet all of the things we talked about in relation to your potential and that goal-setting piece, particularly that value-adding piece?" I think that the individualised for me, with Ipsitif, it's the individualised bit and the value-adding bit that are arguably the most important. And the two that are missing from SMART, weirdly.
So the two most important ones, the ones that will transform your life and the way you feel about your journey are probably the ones that are missing from SMART. Okay. I think that's everything for today, isn't it? Yeah. We're not going to talk about anything else, are we? No. We want to talk about vision, don't we? Because we really like that one.
But we'll probably talk about that next time. We might talk a little bit about cult and culture as well because we think that's quite important. But I want to be careful not to plagiarise Stephen Bartlett because he talks about this a little bit. And we want to talk a little bit about that because that's something that's come up in conversation with some of our community guys in recent
weeks, and we think it's really important. And we think culture is a really, really, really important thing. I've been following the Philadelphia Eagles these last couple of seasons because some friends of mine keep pestering me to go and watch a Philly game. So I think, "Well, if I'm going to ever go, I better " I've got my Philadelphia Eagles cap here, actually, on the shelf next to us, haven't I?
A rainbow-coloured one. And what was really interesting and I in fact, watch it if you haven't watched it. It's on Netflix. There's a Jason Kelsey documentary, and it's really interesting. And for Philadelphia Eagles, there's a very cult-like culture. Not a cult, but a cult-like culture. And that is, for me, actually really powerful. And Jason Kelsey's speech to, gosh, an unbelievably large crowd when they did their parade,
their Super Bowl parade, and what he said was cool. I think one of their phrases is, "Nobody likes us, but we don't care." I think that's one of their supporters' phrases. And I think that's really cool. That's awesome. Yeah. It's really cool, isn't it? But it's quite interesting anyway, the documentary. So it's quite an interesting thing about culture. Yeah? Yeah.
And cult-like culture, different from cult. Okay? But we might talk about that, and we might talk about vision because we think that's a really important one. Again, it links nicely into the goal-setting piece, the difference between dreams and hopes and vision, and why vision is the thing we should be striving towards rather than hopes and dreams, and how it links into what we talked about already today.
So I hope that made some sense. We might include the intuition scale in future episodes as well, if I remember. I might not. But thank you for listening. You need to share, like, subscribe. I get this wrong every week. Whichever way round. Something like that. Share, like, and subscribe. And like I said, guys, this is not about we don't make any money from
this. We don't have any patrons. We don't have any sponsors. We've got no intention of doing that. Lydia and I do this because we enjoy it. We've wanted to do it for some time. We do it because it's really great for our development. We're learning as we go, aren't we? Yeah. I know it's me talking a lot. I am very aware of that possibility
that comes across as mansplaining. But there's a reason that it's me talking the most, isn't there? Yeah. There is. Yeah. It's not because. And I'm here to chip in. You are to chip in. Yeah. We hope we're getting better at them. I think we are. But we're learning as we go, and that's one of the reasons we do them because it's really useful for us to learn.
We learn not just about delivering them, but we learn about the things we're talking about. Sometimes we think of new ideas, or we adjust things we talked about because of what we've said on the podcast or feedback we have from people. So they're really fun for us to do. But if you like, share, and subscribe. That's the one. That's the one. What it does is it helps more people be
made aware of the podcast and the content. And of course, some people out there might really benefit from this. Some of you might really love these, and you might really benefit. Some of you might be a bit indifferent. There's some people out there probably hate them and the way that we and our culture and ideology. In fact, I know they are, but I don't care.
So for those people that will really benefit from this and actually reading your insights report today, Lyds, it was fascinating. It was insightful, funnily. Because what it did was it gave me an understanding of why you've bought into what we do so much. Yes. Yeah? And actually, it's nice because the culture and the ideology has given you that place to be part, that thing to be part
of that was hard for you to find in normal society, wasn't it? Yeah. 100%. Yeah. Which is good because, of course, we can't do too much about our personality type, can we? No. And again, more might become clear over the coming weeks, we'll see. So there may be lots of people out there that may benefit more than you do from this, and we want you to share that with them.
And even if their journey just is listening and benefiting from this, that's great. If it evolves into something more, and then they want to get in contact with us, and we can help either them or their teams or their work teams, their sports teams, then better still because then, obviously, there's some benefit in that for us as well. If you're part of a sports team or you lead a sports team,
then make sure you let us know because we can actually provide some support for you there, in some cases, completely free of charge. So we have that opportunity to kind of talk about some of these things in that environment for you guys free of charge as well. So let us know because we like doing that too. And Lauren goes mad because that's why we don't make any money.
But yeah, that's why we want you to get it out there, not because we get a financial benefit from you doing so. All right? Anything else? No. That's perfect. Okay. Cool. Perfect. Perfect. Well, I'll have to get my coat. Perfect. I don't know. Good job. Good job. Okay. Who says that? Joe Murphy says that. Yeah. Good job.
So we've name-dropped a lot today, haven't we? Yeah. Okay. Right. There were some outtakes at the beginning. Whether we'll add those on, I don't know. We'll see. We'll see. We didn't get our intro right, did we? No. We did. It was funny. Yeah. And we didn't get disturbed too much. If there was a bit of background noise, that's Lauren downstairs.
The dog was pretty well behaved, and the weather behaved itself too, didn't it? The sun's actually out now. It's quite nice now. Cool. Thanks very much, guys. Enjoy the rest of your week. Feedback, comments, let us know, and we'll speak to you again in a few days. Super.